these days American presidents travel
around the country on Air Force one but
in the 1940s there was no Air Force one
actually there wasn't even a US Air
Force they were still part of the army
Franklin D Roosevelt was the first
sitting US president to fly in an
airplane back in 1943 but for most of
his presidency he used a very different
form of travel this is the ferdinand
magellan officially known as u.s. car
number one 120 tons of armor plated
bulletproof railcar the railcar is the
heaviest u.s. real car ever built they
had to build special trucks just to
support the extra weight the reason it
only weighs up to hundred eighty-five
thousand pounds is that was a weight
limit for US railroads bridges and
trestles at that time so the entire car
is not armored proof only where the
president is the car has five eighths
inch thick bulletproof steel through
most of the car up to at this point here
you see where the rivets change from
double rivets the single rivets regular
steel here versus the bulletproof steel
here so there's bulletproofing there's
12 ply laminated glass there are two
escape hatches in the car to get the
president out it was never painted red
white and blue like Air Force One it was
always painted Pullman green when they
had to park it somewhere they would hide
it with other Pullman railcar so it was
basically hiding in plain sight after
Roosevelt's death President Truman used
the Magellan for a while asking the
engineers to get the train up to 80
miles an hour if they could before
television was a way to reach the masses
Truman toured America in this train
campaigning for re-election traveling
tens of thousands of miles between tiny
stations known as whistle stops and
making up to eight speeches a day and it
worked
the famous moment where he held up the
newspaper that wrongly announced his
defeat that was just there on the back
of this train now in 1928
air conditioning was accomplished by ice
their ice bunkers in the car blocks of
ice were put in there and ceiling fans
across the whole car would then blow the
cold air as it dropped down so now we're
heading into the armored part of the car
with the president stayed here we have
the dining room all the rooms in the car
had a phone in them
the car was under way the phones were
hooked up to a radio car called the
general minor now when they were in
stations they were hot wired into the
phones in the station this is a that's
the president would use he could sign
papers this is what the windows look
like this is 12 ply laminated glass
about three inches thick so all the
windows from this point to the rear of
the car are sealed you cannot take them
out which is why they have
air-conditioning state room see here
this is the president's quarters the
president has a fixed bed giving him a
little bit of extra legroom that is what
a commode chair looks like the back
folds down there's a sink and that seat
folds up to be a toilet underneath the
wheelchair was built specifically for
Roosevelt's use in this car so you get
up and down the narrow hallway here we
have the presidential bathroom and the
first of the two escape hatches are here
what would have been a window has been
converted to a steel plate that they
could push out and they could get the
president out that way if they needed to
well it looks like a soap dish hanging
by the door here is actually a cigar
holder Roosevelt was sitting there to
smoke cigars here we have the
Observation Lounge of the car this is
where presidents would sit in the back
of the car and watch the rails past
behind I'm entertaining the guests that
were on the car with him we also have
the second escape hatch and this was
fashioned from a submarine it was
designed if the car was ever knocked
over on its side
they could open this door and go out it
this door leads to the rear platform the
door alone weighs 1,500 pounds that's
about half the weight of the car that
most people come to visit our museum in
it's fashioned after a bank vault out
here is the rear platform this is where
presidents would give their speeches
when Truman ascended to the presidency
after Roosevelt died I pretty much lived
on this car for a few months as you did
a went across the campaign's trail and
he made more than 350 Whistlestop
speeches from this back platform that's
what allowed him to connect with the
American people of course
air travel became easier and cheaper and
safer and eventually the Ferdinand
Magellan fell out of use nowadays it's a
museum piece but in an era where the
Trump train is just a metaphor it's
interesting to note that there were
other presidents whose train was some a
little more real America as a country
except for certain parts of the country
doesn't embrace rails the
that we used to this piece is historic
it is unique it is
harkening back to a simpler place in
time and a simpler pace of life and
that's what I wish we could kind of get
a little piece of that back still keep
our cell phones oh yeah I'm not giving
that up thank you to everyone at the
Gold Coast Railway Museum pull down the
description for more about them and
about the Ferdinand imagine
you